.Dd April 28, 2026
.Dt APSIS 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm apsis
.Nd contracts and telemetry tools for C and Unix pipelines
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a small C library and a set of Unix tools for defining telemetry,
checking numeric runtime contracts, and making CI fail when observed values
violate configured limits.
.Pp
The usual workflow is:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
atlas rules telemetry.atlas > rules.trip
bind probe telemetry.bind > probe.args
bound learn samples.tlm --emit atlas-patch
program | trip -r rules.trip
probe -s worker.queue.depth:u32:queue_depth -n 10 -- ./program | trip -r rules.trip
.Ed
.Pp
The command-line tools are:
.Bl -tag -width "probe"
.It Xr atlas 1
Compiles a source-of-truth telemetry dictionary into
.Nm trip
rules, Markdown documentation, or generated C constants.
.It Xr bind 1
Compiles source-to-symbol or source-to-address binding manifests into
.Nm probe
watch arguments, JSON, or GitHub-flavored Markdown.
.It Xr bound 1
Learns reviewable candidate limits from known-good numeric telemetry samples.
.It Xr trip 1
Reads external
.Ar key=value
or
.Ar key value
telemetry samples and emits events when rules trip.
.It Xr dwell 1
Runs a small demonstration of the in-process sampling API.
Production use
links against
.Nm libapsis
and calls the
.Fn apsis_dwell_watch_*
and
.Fn apsis_dwell_tick
APIs from C.
.It Xr probe 1
Samples typed variables from another Linux process and emits telemetry
records that can be piped into
.Nm trip .
.El
.Sh RULES
Rules use a line-oriented format:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
<key> <op> <number> <level> <event_id>
<key> stale <duration> <level> <event_id>
<key> <op> <number> <level> <event_id> cooldown <duration>
.Ed
.Pp
Operators are
.Cm >
,
.Cm >=
,
.Cm <
,
.Cm <=
,
.Cm ==
,
.Cm !=
, and
.Cm stale .
Levels are
.Cm info ,
.Cm warn ,
and
.Cm error .
.Pp
Durations may be bare seconds or may use the
.Cm ms ,
.Cm s ,
.Cm m ,
or
.Cm h
suffix.
.Sh DICTIONARIES
.Nm atlas
dictionaries use the following directives:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
telemetry <key> <type> <unit> <description...>
limit     <key> <op> <value> <level> <event_id> [cooldown <duration>]
command   <name> <description...>
arg       <command> <name> <type> <description...>
.Ed
.Pp
The aliases
.Cm metric
for
.Cm telemetry
and
.Cm contract
for
.Cm limit
are also accepted.
.Sh BINDINGS
.Nm bind
manifests keep telemetry keys separate from target process symbols or fixed
addresses:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
source metric.alpha f32 symbol metric_alpha
source metric.beta f32 addr 0x7ffd1234
source metric.gamma f32 symbol namespace::metric_gamma object ./libmodule.so
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr atlas 1 ,
.Xr bind 1 ,
.Xr bound 1 ,
.Xr dwell 1 ,
.Xr gate 1 ,
.Xr probe 1 ,
.Xr trip 1
.Sh CAVEATS
Rule evaluation uses
.Vt double
values.
This is suitable for ordinary telemetry thresholds, but exact equality
or ordering for large
.Vt i64
or
.Vt u64
counters above
.No 2^53
is not guaranteed.
.Pp
.Nm probe
does not bypass operating-system access controls.
Linux ptrace policy,
same-UID rules, container policy, and process capabilities may all block
remote memory reads.
.Pp
The repository guardrails are development guidance for this project.
They are not a NASA compliance, flight readiness, safety certification, or
security certification claim.
