.Dd April 28, 2026
.Dt ATLAS 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm atlas
.Nd compile APSIS telemetry dictionaries
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Cm check
.Ar file
.Nm
.Cm rules
.Ar file
.Nm
.Cm doc
.Ar file
.Nm
.Cm header
.Op Fl -prefix Ar prefix
.Ar file
.Nm
.Fl h | -help
.Nm
.Fl -version
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
reads an APSIS telemetry dictionary and validates or compiles it into another
representation.
.Pp
Output is written to standard output, except diagnostics, which are written to
standard error.
.Sh COMMANDS
.Bl -tag -width "header"
.It Cm check Ar file
Validate
.Ar file
and print a count summary.
.It Cm rules Ar file
Emit
.Xr trip 1
rules.
.It Cm doc Ar file
Emit Markdown documentation.
.It Xo
.Cm header
.Op Fl -prefix Ar prefix
.Ar file
.Xc
Emit generated C preprocessor constants for telemetry keys and command names.
The default prefix is
.Dv APSIS_ .
The command fails if generated identifiers would collide.
.El
.Sh DICTIONARY FORMAT
Dictionary files are line-oriented.
Blank lines are ignored.
Comments begin
with
.Sq #
outside quoted strings.
.Pp
Accepted directives are:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
telemetry <key> <type> <unit> <description...>
limit     <key> <op> <value> <level> <event_id> [cooldown <duration>]
command   <name> <description...>
arg       <command> <name> <type> <description...>
.Ed
.Pp
The aliases
.Cm metric
for
.Cm telemetry
and
.Cm contract
for
.Cm limit
are accepted.
.Pp
Types are:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
bool i8 i16 i32 i64 u8 u16 u32 u64 f32 f64 string enum duration
.Ed
.Pp
Operators are:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
> >= < <= == != stale
.Ed
.Pp
Levels are:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
info warn error
.Ed
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Nm
returns 0 on success, 1 for invalid input dictionaries, and 2 for command-line
usage errors.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
telemetry renderer.frame.ms f64 ms "Frame render time"
limit renderer.frame.ms > 16.6 warn frame.slow cooldown 5s
command reset "Reset the worker"
arg reset worker string "Worker name"
.Ed
.Bd -literal -offset indent
atlas check telemetry.atlas
atlas rules telemetry.atlas > rules.trip
atlas doc telemetry.atlas > telemetry.md
atlas header --prefix APSIS_ telemetry.atlas > telemetry_ids.h
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr trip 1 ,
.Xr apsis 7
