.Dd April 28, 2026
.Dt BIND 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm bind
.Nd compile APSIS probe binding manifests
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Cm check
.Op Fl -object Ar object
.Ar file
.Nm
.Cm probe
.Op Fl -object Ar object
.Ar file
.Nm
.Cm json
.Op Fl -object Ar object
.Ar file
.Nm
.Cm github
.Op Fl -object Ar object
.Ar file
.Nm
.Fl h | -help
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
reads a source-to-target binding manifest and emits either validation counts,
.Xr probe 1
watch arguments, JSON, or GitHub-flavored Markdown.
.Pp
A binding manifest keeps an APSIS telemetry key separate from the process
symbol or fixed address that
.Xr probe 1
will read.
.Sh COMMANDS
.Bl -tag -width "github"
.It Cm check
Validate the manifest and print counts for sources, symbol bindings, address
bindings, and entries with missing types.
.It Cm probe
Emit one
.Xr probe 1
watch argument per line.
Each entry must have an explicit type.
.It Cm json
Emit a JSON array describing the bindings.
.It Cm github
Emit a GitHub-flavored Markdown table.
.El
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width "--object object"
.It Fl -object Ar object
Supply a default object path for symbol bindings that do not specify their own
.Cm object
field.
.It Fl h , Fl -help
Show usage.
.El
.Sh MANIFEST FORMAT
Manifest files are line-oriented.
Blank lines are ignored.
A
.Sq #
character starts a comment.
.Pp
Accepted source lines are:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
source <key> [type] symbol <symbol> [type <type>] [object <path>]
source <key> [type] addr   <address> [type <type>] [object <path>]
.Ed
.Pp
Types are:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
bool i8 i16 i32 i64 u8 u16 u32 u64 f32 f64
.Ed
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Nm
returns 0 on success, 1 for invalid manifests or failed output generation, and
2 for command-line usage errors.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
source metric.alpha f32 symbol metric_alpha
source metric.beta f32 addr 0x7ffd1234
source metric.gamma f32 symbol namespace::metric_gamma object ./libmodule.so
.Ed
.Bd -literal -offset indent
bind check telemetry.bind
bind emit watch ./program telemetry.atlas --verify-types
bind probe telemetry.bind --object ./program > probe.args
bind json telemetry.bind
bind github telemetry.bind
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr probe 1 ,
.Xr apsis 7
