.Dd April 28, 2026
.Dt BOUND 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm bound
.Nd learn reviewable contract suggestions from telemetry samples
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Cm learn
.Op Ar files ...
.Op Fl -emit Cm report|atlas-patch|json
.Op Fl -margin Ar percent
.Op Fl -min-samples Ar count
.Op Fl -include Ar text
.Op Fl -exclude Ar text
.Op Fl -level Cm warn|error
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
reads known-good numeric telemetry samples and summarizes observed operating
ranges.
It can emit candidate
.Nm atlas
limit lines, but these are suggestions for human review and are not safety
evidence.
.Pp
Input may use
.Ar key=value ,
.Ar key value ,
probe limlog records containing
.Ar key=
and
.Ar value= ,
or simple probe JSONL sample records containing
.Ar name
or
.Ar key
and numeric
.Ar value .
Contract event lines are ignored.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width "--min-samples"
.It Fl -emit Cm report|atlas-patch|json
Select the output mode.
The default is
.Cm report .
.It Fl -margin Ar percent
Set the learned bound margin.
Accepts values such as
.Cm 20%
or
.Cm 0.20 .
The default is 20%.
.It Fl -min-samples Ar count
Require at least
.Ar count
samples before suggesting limits.
The default is 20.
.It Fl -include Ar text
Only include keys containing
.Ar text .
.It Fl -exclude Ar text
Exclude keys containing
.Ar text .
.It Fl -level Cm warn|error
Set the generated limit level.
The default is
.Cm error .
.It Fl h , Fl -help
Show usage.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
bound learn samples.tlm --emit report
bound learn samples.tlm --emit atlas-patch
bound learn runs/*.log --margin 20% --min-samples 30 --emit atlas-patch
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr atlas 1 ,
.Xr probe 1 ,
.Xr trip 1
