.Dd April 28, 2026
.Dt GATE 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm gate
.Nd run the atlas-bind-probe-trip workflow
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Fl -atlas Ar file
.Fl -binary Ar path
.Op Fl -count Ar count
.Op Fl -interval Ar duration
.Op Fl -fail-on Cm info|warn|error|never
.Op Fl -format Cm text|jsonl|github
.Op Fl -summary-file Ar path
.Op Fl -explain
.Op Fl -keep-temp
.Fl -
.Ar command
.Op Ar args ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is the one-command workflow runner for APSIS.
It orchestrates the standalone Unix tools without replacing them:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
atlas emit rules "$atlas" > "$tmp/rules.trip"
bind emit watch "$binary" "$atlas" --verify-types > "$tmp/watch.args"
probe run $(cat "$tmp/watch.args") --emit samples -- "$@" |
    trip check --rules "$tmp/rules.trip" --fail-on "$fail_on"
.Ed
.Pp
The generated files are temporary and are removed unless
.Fl -keep-temp
is supplied.
Human diagnostics are written to standard error.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width "--summary-file path"
.It Fl -atlas Ar file
Required Atlas dictionary.
.It Fl -binary Ar path
Required binary or object used by
.Xr bind 1
for symbol/type verification.
.It Fl -count Ar count
Sample count passed to
.Xr probe 1 .
The default is 10.
.It Fl -interval Ar duration
Sample interval.
Values may use
.Cm ms
or
.Cm s .
The default is 100ms.
.It Fl -fail-on Cm info|warn|error|never
Contract failure level passed to
.Xr trip 1 .
The default is
.Cm error .
.It Fl -format Cm text|jsonl|github
Select output format.
The default is
.Cm text .
.It Fl -summary-file Ar path
Append a GitHub Markdown summary when using
.Cm github
format.
.It Fl -explain
Print the generated workflow plan before running it.
.It Fl -keep-temp
Keep generated temporary rule and watch files for debugging.
.It Fl h , Fl -help
Show usage.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
gate --atlas telemetry.atlas --binary ./program -- ./program
gate --atlas telemetry.atlas --binary ./program \
    --count 20 --interval 100ms --fail-on error -- ./program
.Ed
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Nm
returns 0 when the workflow succeeds, 1 when
.Xr trip 1
reports contract violations, and 2 for usage or tool orchestration errors.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr atlas 1 ,
.Xr bind 1 ,
.Xr probe 1 ,
.Xr trip 1 ,
.Xr apsis 7
