.Dd April 28, 2026
.Dt PROBE 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm probe
.Nd sample typed variables from a Linux process
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Cm symbols
.Ar object
.Op Fl -filter Ar text
.Op Fl -demangle
.Op Fl -types
.Nm
.Fl p Ar pid
.Fl w Ar name:type:address
.Op Fl i Ar ms
.Op Fl n Ar count
.Nm
.Fl p Ar pid
.Fl s Ar name:type:symbol
.Op Fl o Ar object
.Op Fl i Ar ms
.Op Fl n Ar count
.Nm
.Fl s Ar name:type:symbol
.Op Fl o Ar object
.Op Fl i Ar ms
.Op Fl n Ar count
.Fl -
.Ar program
.Op Ar args ...
.Nm
.Fl h | -help
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
reads typed values from another Linux process and emits APSIS telemetry
samples.
It can attach to an existing process by PID or launch a child process
after
.Fl - .
.Pp
By default,
.Nm
emits
.Ar key=value
samples.
With
.Fl r
or
.Fl -rules ,
it evaluates samples through
.Nm libapsis
and emits rule events unless
.Fl -emit
selects sample output.
.Pp
.Nm
does not bypass operating-system access controls.
It is intended for processes you own in lab, debug, simulation, and CI
settings.
Linux ptrace scope,
same-UID rules, container policy, and process capabilities may all block
remote memory reads.
.Sh COMMANDS
.Bl -tag -width "symbols"
.It Xo
.Cm symbols
.Ar object
.Op Fl -filter Ar text
.Op Fl -demangle
.Op Fl -types
.Xc
List defined data symbols from an ELF object.
With
.Fl -types ,
include ELF symbol kind, binding, size, address, and a size-based probe type
hint.
The reported information is not a source-level C type.
.El
.Sh WATCHES
Address watches use:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
-w name:type:0xADDR
.Ed
.Pp
Symbol watches use:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
-s name:type:symbol
-s name:type:symbol@object
.Ed
.Pp
Supported probe types are:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
i8 u8 i16 u16 i32 u32 i64 u64 f32 f64 bool
.Ed
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width "--terminate-after-sampling"
.It Fl p Ar pid , Fl -pid Ar pid
Sample an existing process.
.It Fl w Ar spec , Fl -watch-addr Ar spec
Add an address watch.
.It Fl s Ar spec , Fl -watch-symbol Ar spec
Add a symbol watch.
.It Fl o Ar object , Fl -object Ar object
Use an ELF object for symbol resolution.
When launching a target, the target
executable is used by default if this option is omitted.
.It Fl i Ar ms , Fl -interval-ms Ar ms
Milliseconds between samples.
The default is 1000.
.It Fl n Ar count , Fl -count Ar count
Number of samples to take.
The default is 1.
.It Fl -delay-ms Ar ms
Delay after launching a child before sampling.
The default is 100.
.It Fl r Ar path , Fl -rules Ar path
Load APSIS rules and evaluate samples with
.Nm libapsis .
.It Fl -emit Ar mode
Select
.Cm samples ,
.Cm events ,
or
.Cm both .
The default is
.Cm events
when rules are loaded and
.Cm samples
otherwise.
.It Fl -fail-on Ar level
Return failure status when loaded rules emit at or above
.Ar level .
Accepted values are
.Cm error ,
.Cm warn ,
.Cm info ,
and
.Cm never .
The default is
.Cm error .
.It Fl -format Ar format
Select
.Cm keyvalue ,
.Cm jsonl ,
or
.Cm limlog
sample output.
The default is
.Cm keyvalue .
.It Fl -json
Alias for
.Fl -format Cm jsonl .
.It Fl -terminate-after-sampling
Terminate a launched target after sampling.
This is the default.
.It Fl -wait-child
Wait for a launched target to exit naturally after sampling.
.It Fl -leave-running
Leave a launched target running after sampling.
.It Fl v , Fl -verbose
Print resolution details to standard error.
.It Fl -ebpf , Fl -uprobe
Reserved for future eBPF/uprobe mode and currently returns a usage error.
.It Fl h , Fl -help
Show usage.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Nm
returns 0 when sampling succeeds and no configured rule failure is emitted.
It may return 1 when a configured rule trips, when
.Cm symbols
finds no matching symbols, or when another non-usage operation reports
failure.
It returns 2 for usage errors, inaccessible processes, unsupported modes, or
failed symbol/rule setup.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
probe -p 1234 -w temp:f32:0x7ffd01234000 -n 1
probe -p 1234 -s temp:f32:imu_temperature_c -n 10 -i 100
probe -s temp:f32:imu_temperature_c -n 10 -i 100 -- ./drone_sim
probe symbols ./program
probe symbols ./program --filter temp
probe symbols ./program --demangle
probe symbols ./program --types
probe -s worker.queue.depth:u32:queue_depth --rules rules.trip --emit both -- ./program
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr bind 1 ,
.Xr trip 1 ,
.Xr apsis 7
.Sh CAVEATS
DWARF struct field paths and eBPF/uprobe argument capture are reserved
capabilities, not active behavior.
.Pp
On non-Linux systems,
.Nm
exits with an error because it requires
.Pa /proc
and
.Fn process_vm_readv .
