.Dd April 28, 2026
.Dt TRIP 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm trip
.Nd check APSIS telemetry samples against rules
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Fl r Ar rules.trip
.Op Fl -fail-on Ar level
.Op Fl -summary
.Nm
.Fl h | -help
.Nm
.Fl -version
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
reads telemetry samples from standard input and emits an event for each rule
that trips.
.Pp
Input samples may use either
.Ar key=value
or
.Ar key value
syntax:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
temperature=82.4
queue.depth 1402
.Ed
.Pp
Events are written to standard output as tab-separated records:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
<level> <event_id> <key> <op> <threshold> <value>
.Ed
.Pp
Diagnostics and optional summaries are written to standard error.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width "--fail-on level"
.It Fl r Ar path , Fl -rules Ar path
Load rules from
.Ar path .
Use
.Sq -
to read rules from standard input when telemetry is supplied separately.
.It Fl -fail-on Ar level
Return failure status when emitted events are at or above
.Ar level .
Accepted values are
.Cm error ,
.Cm warn ,
.Cm info ,
and
.Cm never .
The default is
.Cm error .
.It Fl -summary
Print sample, event, level, and rule counts to standard error.
.It Fl h , Fl -help
Show usage.
.It Fl -version
Show version.
.El
.Sh RULES
Rules are line-oriented.
Blank lines and comments beginning with
.Sq #
are ignored.
.Pp
Rule forms are:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
<key> <op> <number> <level> <event_id>
<key> stale <duration> <level> <event_id>
<key> <op> <number> <level> <event_id> cooldown <duration>
.Ed
.Pp
Operators are:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
> >= < <= == != stale
.Ed
.Pp
Levels are:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
info warn error
.Ed
.Pp
Durations may be bare seconds or may use the
.Cm ms ,
.Cm s ,
.Cm m ,
or
.Cm h
suffix.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Nm
returns 0 when input and rules are valid and no event reaches the configured
.Fl -fail-on
level.
It returns 1 when an event reaches that level and 2 for usage, rule, or input
parsing errors.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
temperature > 80 warn temperature.high
queue.depth > 1000 error queue.backpressure
heartbeat stale 5s error heartbeat.missing
temperature > 80 warn temperature.high cooldown 10s
.Ed
.Bd -literal -offset indent
program | trip -r rules.trip
program | trip -r rules.trip --fail-on warn --summary
atlas rules telemetry.atlas > rules.trip
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr atlas 1 ,
.Xr probe 1 ,
.Xr apsis 7
